I get fan-mail. I do. And sometimes the fan-mail
is so misguided that it has about the same
impact on me as hate-mail. [Laughs]
Let's get into it.
Question number 1... I get this a lot... I
get this [with] all kinds of variations on
a theme. "What is the big deal with learning
ancient languages anyway?" "Richard Gombrich
says I can learn Pali in two weeks." "My Dharma-master
says he learned Sanskrit in three months."
Blah, blah, blah. Oh, yeah. [Laughs]
There are a lot, a lot of scams going, in
terms of language ability, and, I mean, people
in academia really like to just add one more
line to their résumé. Nothing's easier to
add to your C.V. than, "Fluent in _____",
especially if you're at a university where
nobody can check your credentials. If you're
the only guy on campus who says he knows Sanskrit,
who is going to tell you that you don't know
Sanskrit?
It's very, very hard to really gain ability
in any language, living or dead, and it's
very, very easy to fake it in most academic
contexts, and in most religious contexts.
As soon as you've got religious hierarchy,
people are not allowed to question you, or
you're the only one allowed to ask questions.
I remember there was a Buddhist monk trying
to get a PhD in my university in Canada (as
a student) and... y'know, I'd read his work,
I'd read an essay by him, and my professor,
the head of the department [sic], commented
that he could tell [the monk] wasn't really
reading the original text, he wasn't really
looking at the Pali or the other ancient languages
involved. And [the professor] said very simply
that he could tell [the monk] isn't really
doing the reading, because "he doesn't find
problems with it". Interesting comment, because
that professor, his own work related to Japanese
and old Chinese, but it stuck with me because
it's true. People who do the reading --the
real reading-- always find problems in the
text. And that's true even if you're reading
Shakespeare, and Shakespeare's use of English
is not that different from modern English,
but there are a lot of problems. There are
a lot of points where the text doesn't make
sense, or you're left wondering, "Did this
word used to be some other word?", even in
Shakespeare. And certainly if you're looking
at ancient Greek, Latin, any other example
like that.
So, uh, no, the vast majority of people who
say that they know these languages (whether
they say they learned it in two weeks or three
months, whether they say they learned it in
a cave in Tibet, or they say they learned
it in a classroom in London, England), no
matter what they say, it's somewhere between
fraud and a tremendous exaggeration, most
of the time. I've had so many cases [in which]
people with PhDs correspond with me, and I've
read their work, and I say to them, "Look,
I can tell you're not reading the original
text, because what you're saying here --the
philosophical claim you're making-- if you
had read the Pali you would know this doesn't
relate to the original text in any way. So
you get a lot of "broken telephone" going
on, you get a lot of this scam of, "Oh, I'm
gonna quote something that somebody else said
indirectly about the ancient text, and I'm
gonna pretend it's my opinion based on my
original research, or my original translation".
Uuugh, depressing. And then when you wrap
it up in a robe and start asking for donations,
and start telling people that you can cure
cancer with your magical meditation techniques,
man, it gets off the rails quick. The worst
aspects of human nature start to show up before
you know it.
How much of any language can you learn in
two weeks? Two weeks is about enough time,
if you remember the old days when you would
actually buy an album on a piece of plastic,
two weeks is about enough time, when you're
a kid, to learn all the lyrics on an album.
Maybe you got a new favorite album, you listen
to it every day, and after two weeks, you
know all the lyrics. But even then, there
would be some phrases that you can't quite
hear correctly, that you can't quite break
down into words, where you don't quite know
what the singer is saying. Most of us, growing
up, we have the experience of thinking we
know the lyrics to a song, and then years
later finding out what the words actually
were. If we're talking about a foreign language,
then there's no comparison. If you go out
now and buy an album in a language you don't
speak (especially from a different language-family,
Chinese, Cree, you name it, a totally alien
language), even if you listen to that album
again and again and again for two weeks, many
times a day, even if you try to memorize it,
you're not going to be able to break down
the words into parts, you're not going to
be able to know what's going on phonetically,
gramatically, or otherwise. So you'll really
just have a set of familiar sounds that you
can't do much with. And, with Buddhism, that's
pretty close to the type of language learning
that most people do. You may learn to chant
what are basically songs, you may learn to
memorize and repeat a bunch of syllables,
and they may be badly mispronounced... most
of the Buddhist traditions today, it's pretty
hard to figure out what they're saying.
I remember Filliozat told me they had some
kind of annual Buddhist party at one of the
Buddhist institutions in Paris, and they would
invite Buddhist monks from every consulate
and culture that was in Paris, and try to
get them to all chant in unison, and each
of the representatives had a different, terrible
mispronunciation of the same Pali text. So
it was a complete cacophany, you couldn't
hear anything clearly, out of tune, out of
pace, out of step, it sounded awful. She said
she showed up to witness this spectacle for
several years in a row. Not that much to do
if you're a scholar of Buddhism living in
Paris, I think. I'm not sure if that's a sad
story or a happy story. What was my point?
You can listen to an album in your own language
and learn all the lyrics in two weeks. You
can't do that with an album in a foreign language,
[not] even if it's a foreign language pretty
closely related to your own. And to do that
in a foreign language that today is ancient,
doesn't have anyone alive that can speak it,
good luck.
Learning a language, really being able to
read an ancient language, is very hard work.
Being able to read philosophy in a language
is very hard work, and you know, in three
months, even if we're talking about an easy
language --well, let's say Chinese-- in three
months you can learn how to say, "Excuse me,
where's the bathroom?", and "How much does
this cost?", and other useful phrases like
that, in Chinese, but how are you going to
read, debate or dispute philosophy in Chinese,
after three months? Impossible.
Um, with that having been said, I always used
to tell people, "Hey, I never learned how
to say 'where's the bathroom?' in Pali". [Laughs]
But I did learn how to say "Where's the bathroom"
in Lao, Thai, Cambodian, and the other modern
languages I studied.
Alright, question number two... whoo... this
one, man, the way this kind of question is
phrased, you never know, it's always a mix
of fan-mail and hate-mail. "Why would you
even want to get into a PhD program?" "You
are much better off working independently,
on your own." "Life is so much harder with
a PhD...", "Let me tell you how hard my own
life is...". Uuuu.
I got two or three different messages like
that [just] this month, from people who are
today professors. And, I mean, part of it
is that everyone like the opportunity to complain,
and a lot of professors feel that they can
write to me and tell me how hard their life
is. Um, I don't even know if they're trying
to console me, or console themselves. I think
they're trying to make themselves feel better
about what they did with their lives.
Y'know, over the years, I talked to different
specialists about the option of doing an M.A.,
doing a PhD, partly because I already had
the proven ability to do research in various
languages and contexts. "Well, look, I've
been out here for so many years, this is the
type of stuff I've already done, it would
be pretty easy for me to go into an M.A. or
a PhD program and do some kind of work, and
see what doors that could open to me."
The flip side of that is that the institutions
I was talking to could often offer absolutely
nothing in return. This actually comes back
to the first question, a lot of these universities...
I'd just ask a really simple question, like,
"Oh, well, you say you teach Pali, what's
the name of the professor who teaches Pali,
because you don't have anyone listed on your
staff with competence in Pali? Who is actually
teaching the course?"
Even with Thai; one university I talked to,
it was like, y'know, "Okay, so you say you
have a degree in Thai studies, who is the
professor teaching Thai? You have no one on
staff listed doing it."
A lot of universities are eager to take your
money and provide you with absolutely no education
in return. And the sad thing is that when
you're talking about Buddhism, or Asian Studies,
the things that interested me, none of them
lead to any money, so there's this sense of
"Can't we be honest? Can't we be co-operative?
Can't we be honest with each other and ourselves,
when there's no money involved?"
If you sit down at a meeting where everyone's
just there to make money, I understand why
they're going to lie and cheat and rob and
pillage. I understand why people are dishonest
when there's money involved, but, wow, from
the language work to the humanitarian work,
it's amazing that you sit down with people
who have no way of making money out of the
situation, but they still act like a den of
thieves. Sad.
Uh... yeah... y'know the other side of it
is that these people who write in to me, who
themselves have PhDs and are professors and
so on, I think they're just used to talking
to people who became, y'know, chartered accountants.
And I guess they're just really used to saying
to those people, "You're better-off without
a PhD, just living as an accountant, making
money..." --and maybe that's true. Maybe they
know people who became accountants and dentists
and got normal professions and so on, but
it's tremendously crass and insensitive. Wait,
who do you think you're talking to? Y'know,
I got a message a couple of days ago that
was really specifying that I had lived a better
life out in Laos and Cambodia, doing my own
thing, than this guy had lived with a PhD
and a series of academic posts. Well... [Laughs]
do you want to trade places with me? [Laughs]
No matter how tough your conditions are, the
real source of stress is not knowing where
your next meal is coming from, it's not knowing
where your next paycheck is coming from. It's
knowing that even if you have food and shelter
today, you don't know where your home is going
to be three months from now. You don't know
how you're going to pay rent in the very short
term. And, you know, for a lot of my adult
life, since I finished my B.A. --the only
diploma I've still got-- that has been true
of me.
And, no, salaried academics... I sympathize
to some extent with the ways in which they
feel their lives are hell, but they haven't
coped with that stress. They don't know what
it's like to go to a hospital in Vientiane,
Laos, and to communicate with the hospital
staff in Lao, to try to address whatever medical
emergency you've got. They don't know what
that's like, and they don't know what it's
like to do that when you're flat broke. [Laughs]
I payed the Lao rates, man, when I had to
get medical care in Vientiane. I didn't have
any fancy, foreigners' coverage, and I paid
the same low, low prices that local Lao citizens
did, and I got the same quality of treatment,
too, let me tell you. [Laughs]
But, seriously, that's also why I wanted to
do what I did relatively young in life. I
had a couple of professors who were inspirations
to me in a kind of negative sense. One of
my professors, you know, he had never spent
any time in Asia, he lived his whole life
in Canada, and, y'know, I thought, I don't
want to go down that path, and then be in
the situation of just starting to explore
Asia when I'm 50 years old, 60 years old,
of doing what's at the core of my research
interests when I'm too old to really do it,
when I'm too old to take risks. Go out, get
malaria, break your leg, get into life-and-death
situations, [Laughs] do the humanitarian work
and so on. You know, I realized that I wanted
to that "now or never". And, of course, I'm
very glad that I did.
One of my other professors, I remember he
said to me, at the end of my B.A., he said,
"Look, go to Asia now, go to the field, do
it now, because when you come back," this
was his opinion, "There are two types of guys
in academia: there are the guys who went there,
did that, rolled up their sleeves, and they
know what it is, they know what the work in
the field is...", and then he just paused
and waved a hand. And I filled in his sentence,
and I said, "And then there are the guys who
never even tried". He smiled and he agreed
with me.
So, even if those professors were an inspiration
to me in a negative sense, um, y'know, I really
appreciated that I went out and directly got
--in the field-- something that other people
would have to jump through hoops for years
and years to get to.
And the world was changing so fast during
that decade, that the very few opportunities
I had wouldn't exist anymore.
I can also say that, to my chagrin, I remember
I showed up at what used to be called the
National University of Ceylon, the Peradeniya
University in Sri Lanka, I showed up at this
university, one of the very few universities
that really teaches Pali as a subject. I put
down on the table, just at the start of the
discussion, a notebook that had my handwritten
work in Pali, and I had handwriting in literary
Sinhalese, Burmese, Cambodian, Lao (I didn't
just write Pali in Roman orthography, I had
developed my handwriting up to a certain level
in all those traditions), and I sat down and
talked to the professors about the possibility
of studying there. And they looked at what
I'd written in Pali, and they said right away,
"No, no, no, no, you wouldn't be able to take
any of the courses here, you're already much
too advanced for even our level 4 course".
And, you know, I wasn't flattered, and I didn't
feel good about it, and I tried to laugh it
off and say, "No, if I studied here, I would
want to have the experience of being in these
classes, and hearing the language spoken and
so on". They looked at me, really aghast,
because they thought... they thought correctly
that I just didn't realize how awful the classes
were. [Laughs]
And at that time, really, I was still pretty
close to being a beginner myself. The sentences
I had written out were no great accomplishment,
in terms of Pali comprehension, but I'd worked
hard for a couple of years at that point.
And a couple of years of hard work, alone,
independently, is indeed more valuable than
four years or six years in an academic system
that wastes a lot of your time, wastes a lot
of your money, puts you in a situation where
you can't work at your own pace, even if your
own pace would be faster than what the class
is doing.
[Question 3:] Man, I get this question all
the time. "Thank you so much for your blog.
Thank you for your articles. I am just finishing
my university diploma, and I want to do exactly
the same thing you did. I find your story
so inspirational... I want to buy a plane
ticket to Laos...etc. etc."
I get a couple of different people each year...
maybe about 3 different guys a year --and
they're always male, they're always guys--
who have this reaction to my work. And the
feeling, you know, it's like if you were a
jazz singer, and every song you sing is about
how [Laughs] women and alcohol and singing
jazz have ruined your life, [Laughs] and every
day people come up to you and say, "Yeah,
yeah, yeah, I love your album, I love your
songs, you know, I want to be just like you
when I grow up, I want to sing jazz and get
involved with women and alcohol and all of
the things you're warning me about".
[Laughs] You know, I'd like to think that
everything I've written is a really strong
warning against anyone trying to do what I
did. And it's both a warning about what was
impossible at the time, and, also, my articles
are very careful to warn you about how things
have changed in even just a few years.
When I arrived in Vientiane, the capital city
of Laos, the whole city had, I think, two
traffic lights. In the downtown city there
were two traffic lights, and there were zero
bank machines. Electric banking didn't exist
yet. And when people would ask me, "Excuse
me, where's the nearest international bank
machine?", I would proudly say to them, "Thailand,
you have to cross the border to use an international
bank machine".
That changed. Today, the whole country is
wired up. For better or worse, they've got
traffic lights, bank machines and all the
rest of it. And, um... the real opportunities
were probably about 20 years before I arrived.
I met an old German guy who showed up in Laos
maybe 20 years before I did, and at that stage
they were so desperate for skilled help of
any kind, y'know, if you just showed up with
good intentions, you could find some kind
of work to do. The culture of corruption closes
in in a country, much like those electronic
networks, and those opportunities disappear.
And, y'know, the potential of one person to
make a positive difference disappears along
with it --because I wasn't there to make money.
So, in many ways, you know, even though it's
such a short span of time, the Laos I knew
no longer exists. A book that is both inspirational
and a warning, Richard Gombrich's very first
book, "Precept and Practice", that book describes
a whole world in Sri Lanka that does not exist
anymore. It doesn't exist in the city, it
doesn't exist in the countryside. And I remember,
the last time that I talked to him face to
face, I praised that book to him, I said that,
you know, that book was an inspiration to
me when I was starting out, and he said, "Today,
nobody could do that research", because what
he studied, in Sri Lanka, is no longer there
to be studied. And he had the money and institutional
banking to do the research --sorry, [Laughs]
he had the money and institutional backing
to do the research, whereas I worked completely
independently, and my support was whatever
part-time job I could get along the way to
put a roof over my head.
That's the whole story, folks. Stop sending
me fan-mail that sounds like hate-mail. [Laughs]
I've got 12 years of this, man... seriously,
already, like, 2003? I got fan mail back then.
[Laughs]